[Applause]
yeah thanks everyone for being here so
um I I thought last year's conference
badge was uh really neat and um I've
been studying computer architecture for
a couple years now and I thought hey why
don't I I I dive into this with uh with
folks from the superon and get to show
you once again just how cool it is and
what are the the neat things we can do
with it
um
okay
um all right I'm missing my title but
here's the goal for today um I want to
talk to you about kind of the design of
the Voya 4 so we're going to talk about
the ISA or the instruction set
architecture and some of the design
tradeoffs that Voya antonich had to make
in order to bring to us this this
computer that we could all program and
uh talking about the ISA is going to
also involve describing what registers
and are earn the voy for what's the
memory model or the memory map what
instructions are available to us and
then uh we'll start to weave in how we
might program the computer in assembly
um I'll share with you what I like to
call kind of idioms which are just some
short Snippets of Assembly Language
instructions that can form how we are
able to do 16-bit math 16bit Edition um
and how we can use the instructions to
do uh simple things like loops and
conditionals and sub routines um and
then towards the end I hopefully I'll
get to show you how uh some folks from
last year used the vo for to build some
really fascinating projects and uh and
and hopefully kind of tease you a little
bit with some projects at the end to to
really get your mind going and seeing
how the vo for is not just this little
kind of Blinky lights toy but it's a
full
computer um getting into the
architecture and any of you who here
last year that we're playing around with
the badge might ask W this is so low
level what the heck man and and I'd say
you I think my theory is just that if
you write software long enough at some
point in your career you're going to
write a piece of software that uh whose
security its correctness its performance
depends on how the processor is
executing your code down to the
instruction level and it's just a matter
of time um when you get to that point
and when you do hopefully at that point
you you're not learning a computer
architecture for the first time uh it
won't be the first time you've seen
Assembly Language so starting with uh a
simpler architecture like the Voya 4 is
exactly how it's done in in many AED
accredited computer science degrees
because many people still believe even
if you write server level code uh it's
important to know how that code is
actually executed on an architecture um
and also I just I think it's fun man I I
I love programming microcontrollers cuz
you try to do a whole lot with very
little and to me like programming and
assembling understanding how the
processor executes instructions is kind
of the epitome of doing a lot with the
little all right so let's build a
computer
um on the uh on the left should have
been a screenshot of one of the manuals
that uh Voya wrote so you get a link
down here to the his project page um
that's got a bunch of really great
manuals to describe exactly how the
computer works you've also got um kind
of a watchh out link to the uh hackaday
GitHub page with uh an assembler and on
all the uh examples that folks uploaded
last year um I'm going to I'm going to
try not to necessarily repeat this stuff
hopefully I'll give everyone enough of
an introduction to the voy for that even
if you haven't seen it before you can
kind of follow along um but I'm going to
try not to to spend a ton of time uh
repeating all the great material that's
already out there um and I don't know if
these slides are public but I'm happy to
share them and the links with anybody uh
later on okay so the voy 4 has what we
would call a Harvard architecture what
that means is that the the processor in
the middle that executes all these
instructions talks to two separate
pieces of memory one piece of memory
that holds all the actual instructions
and a separate piece of memory that
holds all of our data uh the processor
itself is home to the ALU or arithmetic
logic unit that does all the number
crunching and there's a piece of control
in there that kind of orchestrates the
whole process and then to make this
computer actually useful it's going to
talk to some input and output devices
now on the vo 4 we have what's called
memory mapped IO and so what that means
is that the processor doesn't have
separate data lines and address lines to
talk to IO it doesn't have separate
instructions the voy 4 reads and writes
from memory locations um that have been
set aside which are connected
electronically to input and output
devices so the this allows us to or
allows the processor to um talk to the
outside world using the same
instructions that it would read and
right from
memory all right so if I if I had to
give you an overview of the Voya for Isa
say this would be it um the instruction
memory in the voy 4 that is supported is
uh 4,000 words long and each instruction
is 12 bits wide uh the vo4 supports a
data memory which has 256 data memory
locations that are each 4 bits wide the
processor uh includes an ALU that uh can
perform these 31 instructions and it
produces three flags as a result of some
operations that we can use to sort of
branch on and those flags are um
overflow zero and carry and then the
control unit's got two special registers
program counter and stack
pointer excuse
me all right
um so then the the the loop that the vo4
does over and over and over again until
the power is pulled is called the fetch
decode execute cycle and uh so in an
infinite Loop the voy for will send its
program counter to the instruction
memory say hey give me the the piece of
data that's at this address that that
value which is the next instruction
execute comes into the processor there's
typically a cycle there the where the
voy for will will decode that it'll say
okay what bits are in this op code what
am I doing and then it'll execute that
instruction uh which invariably involves
some sort of of reading or writing to
memory and in many cases also a slight
change to the internal
State the um uh memory Maps IO are
called the special function registers
those live in the very last page of data
memory um so you can see the the 16 um
values there that control the processor
you can kind of broadly group them into
three categories um the uh green box
here are instructions that control the
actual processor so what's its clock
speed and that sorts of things I've got
some registers that I've tried to
highlight in blue that control the
actual LEDs on the badge and then I've
got um a a number of registers that form
sort of some some BAS Bas peripheral so
I have access to basic timers a uart
gpio keypad and even a pseudo random
number
generator um okay I wanted make a quick
note about the difference between
architecture and organization or or
architecture and microarchitecture so
far when we've been describing the vo 4
I've not discussed anything about signal
paths and multiplexers or anything like
that um so this description of the voy 4
on the left that that we use and we're
going to program to um is uh completely
separate from any actual electrical
implementation this little picture I've
grabbed on the right from a totally
different processor would be you know
one level down on the hierarchy that
might be how we would actually implement
the vo for and believe it or not there's
a number of different ways we could
Implement potentially the instruction
set architecture of the vo for I'll give
you a quick example so far we've been
assuming I think that the instruction
memory takes in eight bits of an address
in parallel and spits out or sorry not
eight bits 12 bits of an address in
parallel and spits out a 12-bit
instruction but that's not necessarily
the case maybe we've got a piece of
memory that is not 12 bits wide but only
four bits wide and so maybe there's a
little sub asssembly in the processor or
in the memory that will take the program
counter and sequentially spit out uh
three sets of four bits that the
processor then operates on and and how
that's actually implemented in the
processor as part of the organization
and and and so we're not necessarily
going to get into that today an example
may be in software as if if I talk about
a circular buffer or a q most of us kind
of conceptually know what that means but
that isn't to say that we we all have
the same implementation in our heads
when we talk about that so today we're
going to stay at the architecture
level all right so let's write some
assembly
okay you can't see it but what uh so
yeah so this is going to be a lot of
this be like a storytelling experience
here um uh assembly instructions can be
implemented or grouped into roughly
three categories
uh arithmetic and logical instructions
data movement instructions and control
and branching so we'll look at those
three in turn all right so um here you
can kind of see the um the uh 18 or so
arithmetic and logic instructions that
are in the uh the Voya 4 so we can do
addition we can do subtraction we can do
a couple of logical
operations um I've got uh a couple of
instructions that do some useful things
like incrementing or decrementing a
register and um and the format for these
uh is if it's uh if it's if it's one of
these instructions kind of in the middle
here that specifies two registers uh I
will add or do the subtraction of the
oring on both of the registers and then
store the result in the register on the
left there so I get a little example if
I'm adding R3 and R7 then I'm going to
add those two registers together and
store the result in in R3 um I've got uh
this instruction here dsz marked with an
asterisk because dsz stands for
decrement and skip if zero which is kind
of a mixture of an arithmetic
instruction and a control instruction
but it does arithmetic stuff so I listed
it
here now even though we only have 18
instructions on the vo 4 um we can start
to put some of them together uh
combinations of one or two instructions
uh to do other useful things so the voy
4 doesn't have an instruction to
necessarily do the bitwise negation of a
register but I can very easily Implement
that by just xoring r0 with all once
it's for at a time um if I want to add
two 16 bit numbers together um all I
need to worry about uh in between each
addition is just what that carry bit is
which is exactly what they add with
carry instruction get allows me to do um
so what I've done is create a very um uh
a little Fibonacci Sequence program
where I've got two 16bit numbers stored
in r0 to R3 and R4 to R7 and I'm just
adding one to the other adding that one
back to the first and then looping over
and over again so r0 to R7 sort of show
the last two numbers in this little
Fibonacci Sequence um and this is also a
great demonstration of uh the terms big
Indian versus little Indian memory the
Vo four only operates on four bits at a
time so if I'm working on a larger
number I have to describe how that
number is organized in memory if in my
brain the lower memory address is on the
left and goes up to the right so the
largest nibble in my 16 bit numbers on
the left we call this big Indian because
the the largest part of my number is
sort of stored in the lower memory
address but I could just as easily have
sort of wrote this program as if I were
working with little Indian memory
meaning maybe the it makes more sense to
me to think of the lower memory address
being on the right aligned with the
least significant nibble in my 16 bit
number um I can I can do the same thing
I just kind of reorder my instructions a
little bit um and so on any processor
when you're dealing with numbers that
are larger than the bitwidth of the
processor
um and anytime you have sort of Serial
Communications between two devices that
exceed the the bandwidth or the kind of
the how many bits you can send at a time
you have to specify which is coming
first right most significant bit versus
least significant bit and in memory
that's um big Indian versus little
Indian um the voy for has got a great uh
uh function called direct mode that lets
us interact with the ALU directly and
specifically a handful of the ALU
instructions um so that's a great way to
kind of get into the actual bit
operations on the uh the badge and then
that's also the mode where we can sort
of save and load programs and uh adjust
some other features on on the
badge okay um I want to talk a little
bit about instruction formats and and
this will help us understand I think
some of the design trade-offs that voy
needed to make so um we've already seen
that uh I've got one set of instructions
that require me to specify two operands
two registers and so I've got one format
uh up here in the blue where I get to
specify a 4-bit op code and I only have
room for uh those two 4-bit
registers but I've got a handful of
instructions um that only really require
one operand because they're all kind of
implicitly either operating on register
zero or I only need to specify one
register to increment it um and so those
instruction formats are are down here
you can see kind of in the last four
bits is where I specify that value that
I care about and and the ones to the
left specif my op code and this is a
great example of what's called an
expanding op code so if I told you that
the the vo fore had uh four bits to
specify which instruction it could do
you might think it was limited to 16
instructions um but as we've just seen
there are certain instructions where I
don't I don't need the rest of my my 12
bits to specify the things that um that
I want to specify so what we can do is
say well for the instructions that where
I need to specify two registers or I
need to specify an 8 bit literal those
are those get reserved one of the 15 op
codes in the first four bits but I'm
going to save op Code Zero op code Zer
tells the vo 4 what comes next is an
extended op code there's additional
information that will tell you what this
instruction is trying to do and that's
okay because we don't need those bits in
the middle to specify other values the
value comes in the in the last four bits
and this is what allows the vo4 to have
um a total of 31 instructions available
to it
okay
um so I want to talk a little bit about
design trade-offs now and just like the
Builder triangle where if you're
building a house you get money and time
and quality and you get to pick two but
not all three um when we're designing a
processor almost invariably if we try to
optimize something it's going to hurt
our performance in some other capacity
and typically what we care about when
we're looking at building a processor is
um how fast will it run programs when
it's finally built how much power is it
going to use how much might it cost to
actually build how easy is it or
difficult is it to design and how easy
or hard is it to actually program so we
can see that when Voya uh picked this
instruction format we've got our our op
code which even with the expansion only
allows US 31 instructions and gosh man
it would have been nice to have had a a
multiply instruction in there right or
or I don't know like maybe there would
have been another we have a a rotate
right through carry oh wish I would have
had a logical left shift or something um
but that was a design choice that that
vo made um we've got spaces specify
operands with four bits so I can specify
one of those first 16 memory locations
to operate on in terms of my registers
man wouldn't it have been cool if those
were 8bit operands right then I could
specify operations to be done on the
whole memory
space I've got room for two registers so
it's implied that one of those registers
is used in the operation man wouldn't it
have been cool if there were room to
specify three registers right I could
add R1 and R2 together and store the
results somewhere totally
different all those would have been cool
and they in some ways they might have
produced smaller programs or more
performant software but the downside
would have been that in almost all those
cases or I think in all those cases the
instruction would have got much longer
right if I got a longer instruction then
I either need a bigger instruction
memory which costs more or I can just
fit fewer instructions in my instruction
memory um it might have made in the case
of trying to expand out the op code it
would have made the logic in the
processor to decode that instruction
more complicated which might have made
for a slower processor um or at least a
higher costing processor um and in the
case of the badge I think vo's primary
goal was how can I make a full computer
that's um not difficult to understand
and adding more instructions definitely
would have you know inhibited that goal
another decision that was made was to
make the instructions fix length in some
processors the instructions are variable
length x86 the the processor in most of
the Windows laptops we all have um has
instructions that vary from 1 to 15
bytes long and the nice part about that
is if I've got a really long instruction
then there's part of the op code that
just tells the processor hey the next
four bytes keep reading those in because
that's part of what we're doing here um
and if I've got something really short
it can just live in in a single bite um
but of course the problem with that is
um the design of that processor gets a
lot more complicated right as that
instruction's coming in when the first
bite is read the processor doesn't 100%
know how much more it needs to read in
order to process that instruction so um
arm processors uh employ this fixed
length instruction risk five processors
have fixed length because that
regularity helps make the design of the
processor a lot
simpler um additionally right there's
some design trade-offs made in the
layout of the processor so just deciding
the instru uh the that the processor was
going to be four bits long um that are
uh we were only going to be able to
directly access 16
registers um and and how much memory we
had um were all design choices that that
Voya made uh we we could have expanded
any of these we could have made the the
processor be an 8-bit processor or a
16-bit processor um in real life right
the trouble with that is now I've got
twice as many or four times as many
wires I have to route through my
processor I have to make my Alou two or
four times as large
that increases the cost it increases the
complexity hopefully it improves the
performance but but we don't know for
sure and definitely in this case it
would have not been able to fit that
Alou on the front of that panel if it
were even eight bits wide um and so um
so vo for so Voya had to make a lot of
really interesting design trade-offs in
order to bring this defition and um I
think in a lot of ways there were some
some great kind of uh choices made to be
able to make this be a capable processor
but still a processor that was easy to
understand okay the4 has um like nine or
so data movement instructions so these
are instructions that just sort of push
numbers back and forth we've got uh
three instructions that just move values
between registers or push values into
the the registers that will get used by
the program counter I've got um a couple
of instructions here in the middle too
that will um push data from register
zero or to or from memory
and in effect this is how I Implement my
pointers my indirect memory accesses um
there's no compiler for the vo for just
an assembler so we have to manage our
own memory directly um if I have a
variable that I want to store somewhere
I have to in my head give it a memory
address um and I can refer to that
address uh directly using um let's see
values like uh 3F here to specify moving
that uh reg value from r0 into that
memory location um or I can store three
and F into registers themselves and say
hey whatever's in this register that's
the address where we're going to grab
some data or not uh exr and return are
kind of interesting data movement
instructions exr is short for exchange
register and it lets us sort of swap um
some some registers between page zero
and Page e um and I want to say this is
this is not for saving registers in a
sub routine uh because once you go past
the first level sub routine you're kind
of stuck um it's really it's for
um I think it trying to kind of expand
the number of registers you've got so I
think like one use case might be you
could stash some addresses here in the
alternate register set and you could do
some operations and then when you were
ready to push those out to data memory
you could sort of swap in those
addresses and then and push everything
out uh return is very clearly a sub
routine return so it is a control
instruction that's why I've got an
asterisk here but uh it's also one
feature of it makes it very useful
creating for creating constant tables so
so um the return instruction will push
this literal value n into r0 when it um
when it executes and so we can create a
a table of data uh out of a series of
return instructions and if I sort of
jump to one of these return instructions
the program will execute that return
come back immediately to where the the
the call was made with some constant
value in r z um and especially because
um the uh data memory is so limited if
there's like a bit map of that I'm
trying to like push to the LEDs to kind
of show a cool picture or I've got a big
long string of text then I want to make
that some type of constant
data um okay uh the term addressing
modes refers to how the processor is
going to find what it needs in the
instruction and um the vo for does this
in a couple of different ways so uh you
can kind of barely see it on the left
here I've got the instruction um move
the literal value four into r0 the four
in this case uh in this upper box that's
kind of washed out uh the four is what
we call a literal or immediate value cuz
it's it's baked into the into the
instruction right that instruction when
it comes out of memory the last four
bits are going to be 0 0 0 1 0 0 literal
value four um but there's also uh uh an
operand that's kind of implicit when the
of the processor reads this op code for
move some literal number into r0o
there's no r0o in that instruction
anywhere um the processor just knows
that when this this instruction has that
op code whatever value comes next is
going into R
zero um let's see wased out at the top
is what's called PC relative so we we uh
can potentially tell the processor to do
is take a value and add it to the
program counter and maybe that's the
value we care about so when we execute a
uh jump relative instruction we're
telling the processor to take whatever
value comes after the op code add that
to the program counter and then and go
to that location um I can also refer to
memory in an absolute fashion so if I'm
trying to move um move r a value from
memory into r0 well I specify where in
memory I'm going to get the value I need
in the instruction so that that that
value in the instruction forms an
address that I that I get uh where I get
my data out of memory and I would argue
in fact that all the references to
registers are also memory absolute
instructions because they're all
literally memory locations 0 to 15 um
the uh the last one I think the vo4 US
uses is also called is memory indirect
so in this case if I'm um grabbing a
value out a memory whose address is
specified at another location in memory
right then then I'm sort of using a
layer IND direction to um to to get my
uh my operand um one weird thing about
addressing modes is that they're they're
not industry specific every manufacturer
has different names for these things and
there's an almost Limitless number of
ways that you can think about combining
numbers in an operand or or numbers
registers to to uh to get at data we
could have come up with another layer of
indirection memory indirect indirect
instruction we could have had a memory
offset instruction where I I specify
where in memory I'm going to get my
value and then there's something in my
instruction that adds an a value to that
and that's the address where I get my
memory um so uh one differentiation that
you get between processors and and one
um uh one design choice that those those
designers have to make is um what types
of addressing modes do I think are going
to be most useful to the people who are
writing programs for my processor um and
the x86 processor is notorious for
having a move instruction which is Mega
complex because it's got offsets and bit
fields and shift amounts and um in fact
uh that instruction alone is you can
build a whole computer out of um but
there so there's lots of different ways
that you can address memory um here's a
cool example uh from a program called
ttis
that Copa wrote last year which was a
small version of Tetris um you can see
that in this example he's translating
whatever is the current sort of Tetris
piece that's um falling down and um the
uh the tetris piece is stored as a
series of four X and Y coordinates in
memory that start at address B 0 and so
in this program we start by loading B
and Zer into registers 3 and four and
that becomes a pointer to our
coordinates
so we use this little move indirect uh
function to to pull in the first x value
we add whatever our offset is and then
we store that back to memory uh then we
increment the lower address to go to B1
uh we pull in our yv value add the
offset and store that back to memory and
then we do that four more times for each
of the four the four bits that are
there all right um there are uh we're
going to look at control instructions
now so I would say that there are kind
of three groups of control instructions
you got instructions that change just
the program counter uh instructions that
change the program counter and the sack
pointer effectively how we might like
call sub routines and stuff and you have
instructions that change the L
Flags um golly so um you've got a couple
instructions that will change the
program counter jump relative Skip and
decrement if and Skip if zero um so all
these are going to be used to form uh
more or less like your your Loops or
your short conditional
um by combining there's not like a like
an actual um uh like Branch to some
other address if some condition is met
so the way you typically form these is
by uh using Skipper decr of zero to jump
over a a jump relative call so you know
if we if the if we're not zero we fall
into a jump relative where we go where
we need to and otherwise we we fall into
our code um code block uh we can also do
a what's called a long Jump by writing
to PCL so if we if we target this this
memory location with a right and that
could be moving a value into it or
incrementing that that register then
that tells the processor hey we're
trying to execute a jump somewhere
somewhere really far in program memory
and so the processor will then grab
these three nibbles PCH PC High PCM and
PCL and then just sort of push those
into the program counter and execution
will start at whatever that address
is um you got a number of instructions
that change the ALU Flags just about any
of the instructions that were on one of
that that earlier slide with all my Alou
instructions we'll update those flags um
but I also have two more instructions
that don't really have an effect on the
processor other than to set those flags
so I've got a compare instruction which
will effectively subtract the literal
value in from register zero uh it won't
change the contents of register Z but
whatever the result of that subtraction
is uh the flags will update to to show
that so we can compare our zero to a
number and Branch based on whether it's
it's equal which would mean that the the
zero flag was set or something else um
I've also have a uh an instruction that
lets me test a specific bit in in a
couple of different registers to see if
that bit's been been set or not um okay
this is not going to be good to see but
it's okay because I was not going to go
over it anyways so you can see this
later if you want this is how I might
combine some of those uh jump
instructions to do things like form a
form a loop uh in this case it doesn't
matter if this is a for Loop or a while
loop the structure is the same I'm
testing whether a condition is true if
it is I'm falling into my Loop and then
returning back to the top to test if
that condition is true again um and
right in flowcharts I think especially
when we are uh writing assembly code
it's just a great way to kind of think
of of this stuff um and so I've got a
couple of slides here that show you how
you might do that uh you build that out
of an assembly uh we can do the same
thing with a conditional the one weird
part of a conditional is that I've got
two separate code paths I want to
execute potentially um but I can't list
code side by side in my memory it's got
to be sequential so I've got to get a
little weird with how I jump around code
blocks in order for this thing to
execute so in essence I'm going to pick
one of these two subtasks uh to come
first and then after I test my condition
uh if I execute subtask one I'll just
sort of fall through uh and if I don't I
have to jump around that first subtask
to subtask 2 and then keep going and
once I if I if I do fall into my first
little Branch then I have to jump around
the second one before I keep going with
my code and there's an example here of
doing that for a very simple if El
statement okay um let's talk about uh
calling a sub routine so I want to talk
about the mechanics first which is um
I'm going to I execute a subar te by
writing to the jsr register and sort of
like that long jump if I if I Target
that with a move instruction or an
increment instruction that tells the
processor hey grab those values in PCH
PCM and now jsr stuff those into the
program counter because we're about to
go into a sub routine and as part of
that process the uh Voya 4 will take the
old program counter and and save it in
in the um memory page one this this
region allocated for my sort of program
stack and it'll increment the stack
pointer to point to the next free
location and uh so by doing that in my
code I can kind of jump to this um this
sub routine and then on my way back uh
I'm going to issue the return
instruction um if I'm not using this for
a table then the the value I stuff into
R zero is can be kind of whatever I want
um but that return instruction will uh
take the the last value of the program
counter that's in this program stack and
then push it back into the the actual
program counter and decrement the stack
pointer so this allows me to return to
the exact location in my code where I
made that that function
call um now in order to do this properly
right I have to set up kind of an
interface or you might imagine a very
basic application binary interface or
ABI which is how I set up my processor
before I call this function in order for
it to run correctly and so at the kind
of basic level that means alloc
identifying a register where my input
arguments go and where my return values
are going to come back from um for more
complicated functions right this would
specify where um where multiple values
may go and if they if they can't all fit
in the registers where in memory all of
my input arguments are coming from and
so in in in application binary
interfaces that are uh defined for other
processors um that's part of it right
you have to specify okay if you know if
I've got values that either are coming
into the function in these registers or
um or they're on the stack
somewhere um but just like before I
don't have a compiler I don't have a a
data stack so um I I can't just sort of
push values onto or off of a stack that
doesn't exist right now uh so that means
if my function here uses temporary
registers or or maybe calls another sub
routine and and needs register one um
then my function here has to save those
has to save those values there's an
Unwritten rule that my function when it
returns it has to leave the processor in
the exact same state that it was when
the function first started um so the the
way to do this without a data stack is
to just set aside some blocks in memory
to say these belong to this in this case
my square root function it's going to
save R2 and R3 into memory because we're
going to use those when we're performing
our calculation and we're going to save
R1 as well because maybe we need that
value before we finish Computing um and
so no other piece of memory can touch
those cuz those are used by the square
root function and it also means that uh
I can't have any recursion I can't even
have have my sub routine here call other
sub routine which eventually calls
square root again because those values
will get stomped on and then my program
would go off the
rails um here's a cool example of Callin
sub routines in Demon attack that was
written by unwired bed uh last year so
this is like a little um like base
Defender game here he's calling a a
function to move the uh enemies uh to
the some some amount to the X and so
what he's got to do is um pull into the
registers these values which are stored
in memory so these are forming our input
arguments and then we we call this sub
routine and then once it finishes it
will have updated these two values so
then we're using more move instructions
to push those values back into into Data
memory okay uh I got a couple minutes
left we're going to talk about uh
pushing the limits on our vo for and the
short answer is the limit does not exist
um uh the the basic uh idea of turn
completeness is that it doesn't matter
how complex my thing at the top of this
pyramid is if I can break it down into
uh however far however long it takes me
if I can break it down into things that
my vo 4 can do then my vo 4 can do that
thing and believe it or not there isn't
a program you can think of right now
that the voy for can't do um that's what
during completeness means and it's it's
crazy um the one caveat is that we we we
have to give it enough time and enough
memory which admittedly are big caveat
but to a mathematician they're they're
Minor Details right um at least at least
in terms of uh you know what the the vo
4 is truly capable of it's truly capable
of of everything and I'll give you a
couple examples number one 12 years ago
a fellow by the name of Demitri ported
Linux to the Arduino the at Mega 328 ran
Linux in 2012 because this person ported
it uh to it now admittedly it took 2
hours to get A bash prompt and another
four to load up aunu um but it but it
works right because he did it who I
don't think anyone I would not have
thought that you could run Linux on an
at Mega 328 before I saw this right but
that's what being turning complete means
um admittedly he does say that after
this it was a little snappier I think he
said it was a couple minutes between uh
typing a shell command and getting
response um so it was long but it's
possible um I'll give you one more
example um I think many of us would say
that maybe one of the most uh
restricting parts of the vo 4 was just
how much memory space we had what if I
told you that it was entirely possible
to expand our instruction memory to
64,000 words and expand our data memory
to over 2,000 memory
locations I'll walk you through how we
do this so number one we are going to
write a program for the voy 4 that
emulates the vo 4 so we're going to do a
little Inception piece right yeah I've
got a vo4 here which itself is just a
processor it's going to talk over we'll
say art to a piece of memory um that has
my instructions and my data and and you
can you can't quite see it here but I've
got like an assembly program that um
sends out a program counter over the UR
peripheral to my memory system receives
an instruction back it increments its
little internal program counter and then
based on whatever the value in those
first four bits are um it it it runs
this this piece of code and um so I've
got a my here that's storing my
instructions and my data and and I need
to uh on the actual vo for over here
I've got some some memory set aside to
sort of emulate the the registers and
the program counter and the stack
pointer that are um that I'm sort of
simulating on my
vo4 all right step two is to make the
program counter 16 bits long so I'm I'm
just going to when I send out the the
the the program counter to get the next
instruction I'm not going to send out 12
bits I'm going to send out 16 um and
that involves um um you know expanding
out this little program counter in my
memory to 16 bits um and and I could do
that and what it would do is it would
sort of give me 16 blocks each of of
4,000 words and um when my uh Voya for
got to the last address here zero FFF
instead of adding one and rolling over
back to zero sort of reaching the end of
my memory system it would add one and
sort of move into this next block here
it would be one FFF um the uh that's
that's not a huge game those blocks are
still kind of segmented it's going to be
difficult for me to kind of jump back
and forth between them so I'm going to
make one more change to the voy for Isa
and what I'm going to do is take
register 9 here and I'm going to call
that register PCT or PCT top and so now
my program counter is formed from these
four nibbles PCT followed by PCH PCM and
PCL so the rest of the instruction set
architecture is the same it's just that
when I make long jumps or sub routine
calls
by writing to the jsr or the PCL
register um I just have to modify my
program a little bit so that when that
when it does that it's now going to grab
a a 16bit PC value and send that to my
memory and so now it might take a little
bit of hand assembling because the
assembler doesn't support this but I can
write long jumps and sub rtin calls that
expand out all the way across 64,000
memory spaces 64,000 instructions and
with one little trick I can kind of
expand my uh data memory also um to do
that I'm going to use a technique called
banked memory and so I'm going to take
uh this little register right here or
this little uh piece of memory and I'm
going to call that my bank number so
that Reg that value that uh spot in
memory can be anywhere from 0 to 15 and
um and I'm going to say this this
rectangle up here is my sort of shared
memory the rectangle underneath it is
what's called banked memory and which
which uh of those banks are sort of in
play at any point in time is dictated by
the value in this little box right here
so I can reference 18 different or sorry
16 different uh Banks of these these
areas by just changing the number in
this this little box right here and that
gives me um 4 plus 8 * 16 pages of
memory that I can reference which is
what allows me to go up to uh 2,000
2,000 words and I might have to do a
little bit of um data shuffling to go
back and forth but but I can totally do
that
all right um so hopefully despite the
slides I i' I've peed y'all's interest a
little bit and and and shared with you
how cool this device is and what are all
the things you can do with it I'm going
to share with you a few resources and
get out of here number one um Boya was
kind enough to share his design files
with me and help make sure that I had
the correct ones so if you want to get
one for yourself you can do that I've
got about 125 on order um that'll be
coming in in the next week or so and uh
so don't don't be dismayed if it says
out of stock I'm just waiting for those
to come in and you can buy one um if
you're interested in um yeah I'll share
that with you later I'll put that back
up don't worry um if you're interested
in learning a little bit more about
computer architecture these three books
I feel like have been super useful for
me um they're they've been very
approachable very clear um and two of
them this one here comes with its own
website and eour era course uh this one
here was the textbook that I used for my
computer architecture course last year
at West Point and so there's a website
down here you can see the course website
where I shared uh computer architecture
stuff with my students um if if you want
to get your hands on actually building a
processor out of chips um there are ways
to do that I thought these two were kind
of the coolest um the 4bit CPU by um big
Messa wirus here doesn't come with a kit
actually but it's fully described in the
website and Ben eer is famous for having
a whole series of kits about building an
8bit computer um on breadboards and with
that um I just want to say real quick
thanks to Voya for all the great work
he's done on this badge and many others
thanks to uh hackaday and Supply frame
for the super and and thanks to you all
for hearing me blather for 40 minutes uh
I hope you all enjoy the rest of the
conference